Relational databases offer SQL which is way better than key-value or other level ways  to manipulate big data sets. However, SQL's expressive power is very limited in time-series domain. Relational tables grow "Downwards" by adding rows  and SQL is reasonably expressive and fast. But, time-series data is different - typically, it's a row series data consisting of primary key and series of other attributes. It follows "Wide rows" model. SQL's row-oriented model does not fit well for time-series data. You are essentially building entity-attribute-value model which is in-efficient and contains tons of repeated data and it's difficult to query.

Secondly, the size of time series data that you are dealing with is hugh - millions of entries. Single-node databases have only a limited capabilities and running a production time series service, you need a distributed database. RRD files are not good foundation for building this type of system. People have tried to build time-series databases on the top of NoSQL databases and popular examples are OpenTSDB, KairosDB. But, the problem with these solutions is getting expreienced people to run the DBs. Also, it's not possible to get a good read performance from these DBs. That's the reason, people have now turned their attention to native time-series databases.

A unique characteristics of time-series data include write-append-mostly, rare updates, sequential reads, and occasional bulk deletes. The datastore needs to be optimized for all of these. Good examples of Time series databases are OpenTSDB, InfluxDB. In addition, you may also have to look at other parameters like volume of data, flexibility of storage, horizontal scalbility, high availability etc.
